---
title: "An intracranial dissection of human escape circuits"
collection: publications
category: manuscripts
permalink: /publication/2024-01-16-intracranial-dissection-human-escape-circuits
excerpt: 'Intracranial EEG recordings during a flight initiation distance task reveal distinct roles of reactive and cognitive fear circuits in human escape behavior.'
date: 2024-01-16
venue: "bioRxiv"
paperurl: "https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2024.01.16.575785v1.full.pdf"
bibtexurl: "https://www.biorxiv.org/action/downloadCitation?doi=10.1101/2024.01.16.575785&format=bibtex"
citation: 'Zhang, H., Cheng, J., Hu, K., Wang, F., Qi, S., Liu, Q., Yao, Y., Mobbs, D., & Wu, H. (2024). "An intracranial dissection of human escape circuits." bioRxiv, 2024.01.16.575785.'
---
Predators attack at different spatiotemporal scales, spurring prey to elicit escape responses that range from simple motor reactions and strategic planning that involve more complex cognitive processes. Recent work in humans suggests that escape relies on two distinct circuits: the reactive and cognitive fear circuits. However, the specific involvement of these two circuits in different stages of human escaping remains poorly characterized. In this study, we recorded intracranial electroencephalography (iEEG) from epilepsy patients while they performed a modified flight initiation distance (FID) task. We found brain regions in the cognitive fear circuit, including the ventromedial prefrontal cortex and hippocampus, encoded the threat level during the information processing stage. The actual escaping stage, especially under rapid attack, prominently activated areas within the reactive fear circuit, including the midcingulate cortex and amygdala. Furthermore, we observed a negative correlation between the high gamma activity (HGA) of the amygdala and the HGA of the vmPFC and HPC under rapid attacks. This indicates that the amygdala may suppress the activity of the cognitive fear circuit under rapid attacks, enabling the organism to react quickly to ensure survival under the imminent threat. These findings highlight the distinct roles of the reactive and cognitive fear circuits in human escaping and provide accounts for the importance of fear in human survival decisions.
